[DPE-3253] Charmed Spark tutorial (#87)
canonical/spark-client-snap: docs/tutorial/t-setup.md

> ## Setup Environment for the Tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up the environment for the tutorial
```
- Unnecessary capitalization
- "setup" is a noun, "set up" would be the verb. because reasons 🤷🏼

> ## Setup Environment for the Tutorial

Reviewer: It would be best to remove `#` from each heading (i.e. starting every page with `# Title`, and continuing the hierarchy from there)

This can affect some important things like
- Accessibility checks
- Visual and formatting consistency among our docs
- Upcoming vanilla update (web framework that decides how our discourse content is rendered), especially automatic Table Of Content generation.

I didn't account for this in my header suggestions to avoid breaking stuff in case you commit suggestions. This is probably best to change in one isolated commit.

Author: Fixed.

sudo snap alias microk8s.kubectl kubectl

# Add the current user into 'microk8s' group
sudo usermod -a -G snap_microk8s ${USER}

# Create and provide ownership of '~/.kube' directory to current user
mkdir -p ~/.kube
sudo chown -f -R ${USER} ~/.kube

# Put the group membership changes into effect
newgrp snap_microk8s
```

Once done, the status of the MicroK8s can be verified with

```bash
microk8s status --wait-ready
```

When MicroK8s cluster is running and ready, you should see an output similar to the following:

```
microk8s is running
high-availability: no
...
addons:
  enabled:
    dns                  # (core) CoreDNS
    ha-cluster           # (core) Configure high availability on the current node
    helm                 # (core) Helm - the package manager for Kubernetes
    helm3                # (core) Helm 3 - the package manager for Kubernetes
  disabled:
    cert-manager         # (core) Cloud native certificate management
...
```

Let's generate the Kubernetes configuration file using MicroK8s and write it to `~/.kube/config`. This is where Kubernetes looks for the Kubeconfig file by default.

```bash
microk8s config | tee ~/.kube/config
```

> Now let's enable a few addons for using features like role based access control, load balancing and usage of local volume for storage.
> 
> ```bash
> sudo microk8s enable rbac storage hostpath-storage
> 
> sudo apt install -y jq
> 
> # Get IP address
> IPADDR=$(ip -4 -j route get 2.2.2.2 | jq -r '.[] | .prefsrc')
> sudo microk8s enable metallb:$IPADDR-$IPADDR
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's enable a few addons for using features like role based access control, usage of local volume for storage, and load balancing

```bash
# Enable rbac
sudo microk8s enable rbac

# Enable storage
sudo microk8s enable storage hostpath-storage

# Enabling metallb for load balancing
sudo apt install -y jq
IPADDR=$(ip -4 -j route get 2.2.2.2 | jq -r '.[] | .prefsrc')
sudo microk8s enable metallb:$IPADDR-$IPADDR
```
```

Once done, the list of enabled addons can be seen via `microk8s status --wait-ready` command. The output of the command should look similar to the following:

```
microk8s is running
...
addons:
  enabled:
    dns                  # (core) CoreDNS
    ha-cluster           # (core) Configure high availability on the current node
    helm                 # (core) Helm - the package manager for Kubernetes
    helm3                # (core) Helm 3 - the package manager for Kubernetes
    hostpath-storage     # (core) Storage class; allocates storage from host directory
    metallb              # (core) Loadbalancer for your Kubernetes cluster
    storage              # (core) Alias to hostpath-storage add-on, deprecated
...
```

### Setup MinIO

> Spark can be configured to use S3 for object storage. However for simplicity, instead of using AWS S3, we're going to use an S3 compliant object storage library `minio`, an add-on for which is shipped by default in `microk8s` installation. Using MinIO, we can have an S3 compliant bucket created locally which is more convinient than AWS S3 for experimentation purposes. Let's enable the `minio` addon for MicroK8s.

Reviewer 2: what about adding a link to minio ? Like [this](https://min.io/) and [this](https://microk8s.io/docs/addon-minio)

Author: Added.

```bash
sudo microk8s enable minio

> ```

Reviewer: It is usually recommended to separate the sentence that introduces what the following command is about to do.

```suggestion
Spark can be configured to use S3 for object storage. However for simplicity, instead of using AWS S3, we're going to use an S3 compliant object storage library `minio`, an add-on for which is shipped by default in `microk8s` installation. Using MinIO, we can have an S3 compliant bucket created locally which is more convinient than AWS S3 for experimentation purposes. 

Let's enable the `minio` addon for MicroK8s.
```bash
sudo microk8s enable minio
```
```

> For Spark to be able to access the local S3 bucket, we'll need to authenticate to MinIO using an access key and a secret key. These credentials are generated and stored as Kubernetes secret when the `minio` add-on is enabled. Let's fetch these credentials and export them as environment variables in order to use them later.

Reviewer 3: nit.I will rephrase the first sentence in this way: "Authentication with Minio is managed with access key and secret key, there credentials..."

Reviewer 2: @welpaolo you meant `...these credentials...", right?

Author: Rephrased. Thanks.

> For Spark to be able to access the local S3 bucket, we'll need to authenticate to MinIO using an access key and a secret key. These credentials are generated and stored as Kubernetes secret when the `minio` add-on is enabled. Let's fetch these credentials and export them as environment variables in order to use them later.
> 
> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Spark to be able to access the local S3 bucket, we'll need to authenticate to MinIO using an access key and a secret key. These credentials are generated and stored as Kubernetes secret when the `minio` add-on is enabled. 

Let's fetch these credentials and export them as environment variables in order to use them later.
```bash
```

export ACCESS_KEY=$(kubectl get secret -n minio-operator microk8s-user-1 -o jsonpath='{.data.CONSOLE_ACCESS_KEY}' | base64 -d)
export SECRET_KEY=$(kubectl get secret -n minio-operator microk8s-user-1 -o jsonpath='{.data.CONSOLE_SECRET_KEY}' | base64 -d)
export S3_ENDPOINT=$(kubectl get service minio -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}')
export S3_BUCKET="spark-tutorial"
```

> The MinIO add-on also provides with a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The MinIO add-on offers access to a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:
```

> The MinIO add-on also provides with a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MinIO add-on also provides with a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. 

Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:
```

> The MinIO add-on also provides with a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:
> 
> ```bash
> MINIO_UI_IP=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}')
> MINIO_UI_PORT=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].port}')
> export MINIO_UI_URL=$MINIO_UI_IP:$MINIO_UI_PORT
> echo $MINIO_UI_URL
> ```
> 
> On running the command above, you should see a combination of IP address and port. Let's open the URL in a web browser. In the login page that appears, the username is the access key and the password is the secret key we fetched earlier. These credentials can now be viewed simply by `echo`ing the variables `ACCESS_KEY` and `SECRET_KEY`:

Reviewer: A suggestion for structure changes that increase clarity. Github markdown doesn't support code blocks inside code blocks so I can't use the ` ```suggestion` block for this one:

---

The MinIO add-on also provides with a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. 
	
Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:
```bash
MINIO_UI_IP=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}')
MINIO_UI_PORT=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].port}')
export MINIO_UI_URL=$MINIO_UI_IP:$MINIO_UI_PORT
```
Your URL is a combination of an IP address and port. Print it by running 
```bash
echo $MINIO_UI_URL
```
Let's open this URL in a web browser. In the login page, the username is the access key and the password is the secret key we fetched earlier.
	
These credentials can now be viewed simply by `echo`ing the variables `ACCESS_KEY` and `SECRET_KEY`:

> The MinIO add-on also provides with a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:
> 
> ```bash
> MINIO_UI_IP=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}')
> MINIO_UI_PORT=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].port}')
> export MINIO_UI_URL=$MINIO_UI_IP:$MINIO_UI_PORT
> echo $MINIO_UI_URL
> ```
> 
> On running the command above, you should see a combination of IP address and port. Let's open the URL in a web browser. In the login page that appears, the username is the access key and the password is the secret key we fetched earlier. These credentials can now be viewed simply by `echo`ing the variables `ACCESS_KEY` and `SECRET_KEY`:
> 
> ```bash
> echo $ACCESS_KEY
> echo $SECRET_KEY
> ```

Reviewer: Sectioning suggestions for more clarity:

```suggestion
The MinIO add-on also provides with a Web UI which can be used to interact with the local S3 object storage. For us to be able to open it in the browser, we will need the IP address and port at which the MinIO Web UI is exposed. 

Let's fetch the MinIO web interface URL as follows:
```bash
MINIO_UI_IP=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}')
MINIO_UI_PORT=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].port}')
export MINIO_UI_URL=$MINIO_UI_IP:$MINIO_UI_PORT
```
Your URL is a combination of an IP address and port. Print it by running 
```bash
echo $MINIO_UI_URL
```
Let's open this URL in a web browser. In the login page, the username is the access key and the password is the secret key we fetched earlier.

These credentials can now be viewed simply by `echo`ing the variables `ACCESS_KEY` and `SECRET_KEY`:
```bash
echo $ACCESS_KEY
echo $SECRET_KEY
```
```

Once you're logged in, you'll see the MinIO console as shown below. 
![Minio Dashboard (Empty)](resources/minio-dashboard-empty.png)

The list of the buckets currently in our S3 storage is empty. That's because we have not created any buckets yet! Let's proceed to create a new bucket now.

Click "Create Bucket +" button on the top right. On the next screen, let's choose "spark-tutorial" for the name of the bucket and click "Create Bucket". That's it. We now have a S3 bucket available locally on our system!

In the next sections, you're required to upload some sample files into the S3 bucket. This can either be done using the MinIO UI (just like you created the bucket above) or more conviniently by using AWS CLI. Let's setup the AWS CLI as follows:

```bash
sudo snap install aws-cli --classic

aws configure set aws_access_key_id $ACCESS_KEY 
aws configure set aws_secret_access_key $SECRET_KEY 
aws configure set region "us-west-2" 
aws configure set endpoint_url "http://$S3_ENDPOINT"
```

The proper configuration of AWS CLI can be verified by listing the S3 buckets using the following command:

```bash
aws s3 ls
# 
# 2024-02-07 07:47:05 spark-tutorial
```

> With the access key, secret key and the endpoint properly configured, you should `spark-tutorial` bucket listed in the output.

Reviewer 2: **praise** I really like that you show both the UI and the CLI to use MinIO, making it very educational

Author: :bow:

> ### Setup Juju

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up Juju
```

Juju is an Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) for clouds, bare metal, LXD or Kubernetes. We'll use `juju` to deploy and manage the Spark History Server and a number of other applications later to be integrated with Spark. Let's therefore let's install and configure a `juju` client using a snap.

```bash
sudo snap install juju --channel 3.1/stable

> mkdir -p ~/.local/share

Reviewer 3: I don't believe this step is really needed.

Author: When this step is skipped, the subsequent command fails with the following error:

```
ubuntu@ip-172-31-23-133:~$ juju clouds
ERROR cannot create juju home directory: mkdir /home/ubuntu/.local: permission denied
WARNING Installing Juju in a strictly confined Snap. To ensure correct operation, create the ~/.local/share/juju directory manually.
```

```

> Juju has a built-in knowledge of MicroK8s and can detect MicroK8s cluster installed in our system automatically without the need of additional setup or configuration. You can verify this by running `juju clouds` command. You should see an output similar to the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Juju can automatically detect all available clouds on our local machine without the need of additional setup or configuration. You can verify this by running `juju clouds` command. You should see an output similar to the following:
```

```
Only clouds with registered credentials are shown.
There are more clouds, use --all to see them.
You can bootstrap a new controller using one of these clouds...

Clouds available on the client:
Cloud      Regions  Default    Type  Credentials  Source    Description
localhost  1        localhost  lxd   0            built-in  LXD Container Hypervisor
microk8s   1        localhost  k8s   0            built-in  A Kubernetes Cluster
```

As you can see, Juju has detected LXD as well as K8s installation in the system. For us to be able to deploy Kubernetes charms, let's bootstrap a Juju controller in the `microk8s` cloud:

```bash
juju bootstrap microk8s spark-tutorial
```

The creation of the new controller can be verified with `juju controllers` command. The output of the command should be similar to:

```
Use --refresh option with this command to see the latest information.

Controller       Model  User   Access     Cloud/Region        Models  Nodes  HA  Version
spark-tutorial*  -      admin  superuser  microk8s/localhost       1      1   -  3.1.7
```

> ### Setup spark-client snap and service accounts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up spark-client snap and service accounts
```

> When Spark jobs are run on top of Kubernetes, a set of Kubernetes resources like service account, associated roles, role bindings etc. need to be created and configured. Luckily, we have a `spark-client` snap as part of Charmed Spark solution to do all of that. Let's install the `spark-client` snap at first:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When Spark jobs are run on top of Kubernetes, a set of resources like service account, associated roles, role bindings etc. need to be created and configured. To simplify this task, the Charmed Spark solution offers the `spark-client`. Let's install the `spark-client` snap at first:
```

> When Spark jobs are run on top of Kubernetes, a set of Kubernetes resources like service account, associated roles, role bindings etc. need to be created and configured. Luckily, we have a `spark-client` snap as part of Charmed Spark solution to do all of that. Let's install the `spark-client` snap at first:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Spark jobs are run on top of Kubernetes, a set of Kubernetes resources like service account, associated roles, role bindings etc. need to be created and configured. Luckily, we have a `spark-client` snap as part of Charmed Spark solution to do all of that. 

Let's install the `spark-client` snap at first:
```

Author: Done

```bash
sudo snap install spark-client --channel 3.4/edge
```

Let's create a Kubernetes namespace for us to use as a playground in this tutorial.

```bash
kubectl create namespace spark
```

We will now create a Kubernetes service account that will be used to run the Spark jobs. The creation of the service account can be done using the `spark-client` snap, which will create necessary roles, rolebindings and other necessary configurations along with the creation of service account.

```bash
spark-client.service-account-registry create \
  --username spark --namespace spark
```

> This command does a bunch of things in the background. First, it creates a service account in the `spark` namespace with the name `spark`. Then it creates a role with name `spark-role` with all the required RBAC permissions and binds that role to the service account by creating a role binding. These resources can be viewed as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command does a number of things in the background. First, it creates a service account in the `spark` namespace with the name `spark`. Then it creates a role with name `spark-role` with all the required RBAC permissions and binds that role to the service account by creating a role binding. These resources can be viewed as:
```

> This command does a bunch of things in the background. First, it creates a service account in the `spark` namespace with the name `spark`. Then it creates a role with name `spark-role` with all the required RBAC permissions and binds that role to the service account by creating a role binding. These resources can be viewed as:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command does a bunch of things in the background. First, it creates a service account in the `spark` namespace with the name `spark`. Then it creates a role with name `spark-role` with all the required RBAC permissions and binds that role to the service account by creating a role binding. 

These resources can be viewed with:
```

Author: Fixed.

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: Maybe add output of the following commands.

Author: Added.
